🎨 CSS Designing Assignment – Core Properties Practice

Task 1 : - write all the properties and their values (you have studied so far) in a text file with 
detailed explaination.

Table of Contents:
    1. Introduction to CSS
    2. CSS Syntax
    3. Types of selectors in CSS
    4. Creating boxes/blocks in CSS
    5. Margin of boxes/blocks in CSS
    6. Padding of boxes/blocks in CSS
    7. Background properties of boxes/blocks in CSS

1.  INTRODUCTION TO CSS

    CSS is acronym of Cascading Style Sheets. 
    It helps to define the presentation of HTML elements as a separate file known as CSS file having .css extension.

    What is CSS?
    > CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets, used to describe the presentation and design of a web pages.
    > Using CSS, you can control the color of the text, the style of fonts, the spacing between paragraphs, 
      how columns are sized and laid out, what background images or colors are used.
    > CSS can control the layout of multiple web pages all at once.

2. CSS SYNTAX

    Syntax of CSS consist of selectors and declaration used to apply styles to HTML elements.

    selector {
        property: value;
    }

    > The selector targets the HTML element/elements that you want to style.
    > The declaration block contains one or more declarations enclosed in curly braces {}.
    > Each declaration consists of a property and a value separated by a colon :. Declarations are separated by semicolons ;.

3.  TPYES OF SELECTORS IN CSS   

    CSS Selectors are used to select the HTML elements you want to style on a web page. 
    They allow you to target specific elements or groups of elements to apply styles like colors, fonts, margins, and more.
    The element or elements that are selected by the selector are referred to as subject of the selector.

    a. UNIVERSAL SELECTOR
        CSS universal selector is a special selector that selects all the elements in an HTML document. It is denoted by an asterisk mark (*).

        Syntax
        The syntax for the universal selector is as follows:
            * {
                margin: 0;
                padding: 0;
            }
    b. ELEMENT SELECTOR
        CSS element selector selects and styles specific HTML elements. The element selector is defined by simply using the element's name in the stylesheet.

        Syntax
        The syntax for the element selector is as follows:
            p {
                color: green;
            }

            h1 {
                text-decoration-line: underline;
            }

    c. CLASS SELECTOR
        CSS class selector selects an element with a specific class attribute. The class selector is defined using a period (.) followed by the class name.

        Syntax
        The syntax for the class selector is as follows:
            .style-h1 {
                text-decoration-line: underline;
            }

            .style-p {
                color: green;
                font-size: 25px;
            } 

    d. ID SELECTOR
        CSS ID selector selects an element with a specific value for its id attribute. It is denoted by the "#" (hash) symbol.

        Syntax
        The syntax for the ID selector is as follows:
            #style-p {
                color: green;
                font-size: 25px;
            } 

            #style-h1 {
                text-decoration-line: underline;
                color: red;
            }

    e. INLINE SELECTOR
        Inline selectors in CSS refer to the use of the style attribute within HTML elements to apply styles directly to those elements. 
        This method allows for quick, element-specific styling without the need for external or internal CSS files.
        For example, the style attribute can be used to set the text color and font size of a paragraph directly in the HTML code.

        Inline styles do not use selectors or curly braces, and instead, the style attribute contains CSS property-value pairs separated by semicolons.

        Syntax
        The syntax for the inline selector is as follows:
            <p style="color: blue; font-size: 16px;">
            This is a blue paragraph with font size 16px.
            </p>

    d. INTERNAL & ENTERNAL SELECTORS
        Internal and external CSS differ primarily in their location, scope, and reusability, though they both utilize the same CSS selectors for styling elements.

        Internal CSS
            Location: Defined within a <style> tag in the <head> section of an HTML document.
            Scope: Applies styles to the entire HTML document where the <style> tag is placed.
            Reusability: Styles can be reused across multiple elements within the same HTML document but not across different HTML files.

            Syntax
                <head>
                <style>
                    p {
                    color: blue;
                    }
                </style>
                </head>
                <body>
                <p>This is a blue-colored text.</p>
                </body>

        External CSS
            Location: Stored in a separate .css file and linked to the HTML document using the <link> tag within the <head> section.
            Scope: Styles defined in an external CSS file can be applied to multiple HTML documents, making it suitable for large-scale websites.
            Reusability: Highly reusable, as a single CSS file can control the styling of multiple pages, ensuring consistency and reducing redundancy.

            Syntax
            html file
                <head>
                <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css">
                </head>
                <body>
                <p>This is a blue-colored text.</p>
                </body>
            style.css
                p {
                    color: blue;
                }

4. CREATING BOXES/BLOCKS IN CSS
    To create boxes or blocks we need to under many properties of css.

    CSS Width and Heigth
    In CSS, the width and height properties are used to specify the size (width and height) of an element. 
    The width property defines how wide the element's content can get, while the height property defines how tall the element can be.
    These properties can be set using various units such as pixels (px), percentages (%), ems (em), rems (rem), or viewport units (vw, vh).

    Border
    The border property creates a border around an HTML element, 
    such as a div, image, or text. You can customize the border by changing the border style, width, radius, and color for each side of the element.

    border-style: It specifies whether a border should be solid, dashed line, double line, or one of the other possible values.
    border-width: It specifies the width of a border.
    border-color: It specifies the color of a border.

    Border Style For Individual Sides:
    border-top-style: It sets the style of an element's top border.
    border-bottom-style: It sets the style of an element's bottom border.
    border-left-style: It sets the style of an element's left border.
    border-right-style: It sets the style of an element's right border.

    Border width for individual sides:
    border-top-width: Sets the width of the top border.
    border-bottom-width: Sets the width of the bottom border.
    border-left-width: Sets the width of the left border.
    border-right-width: Sets the width of the right border.

    Border color property for individual sides:
    border-top-color: Sets the color of the top border.
    border-bottom-color: Sets the color of the bottom border.
    border-left-color: Sets the color of the left border.
    border-right-color: Sets the color of the right border.

    Borders Individual Side Shorthand Property:
    border-top property: It is a shorthand property for setting the top border properties.
    border-bottom property: It is a shorthand property for setting the bottom border properties.
    border-left property: It is a shorthand property for setting the left border properties.
    border-right property: It is a shorthand property for setting the right border properties.

    example:
    border-top: 4px solid red;
    border-bottom: 2px dashed blue;
    border-left: 6px dotted green;
    border-right: 8px double yellow;

    Override border Shorthand Property:
    div {
        border: 5px solid gray;
        border-bottom-width: 15px;
    }

    CSS border-radius Property:
    CSS border-radius property is used to specify the roundness of border edges. 
    The value for this property can be in length (px, em) or percentages.
    A border radius of 50% indicates a complete circle.

    example:
    border-radius: 20px;
    border-radius: 50%;
    border-bottom-right-radius: 30px;


5. MARGIN OF BOXES/BLOCKS IN CSS
    CSS margins are used to create space around the outer part of an element.

    What is CSS Margin?
        > A Margin in CSS makes the layout visually appealing by adding extra space between elements.
        > You can set the margin for individual sides using properties margin-bottom, margin-top, margin-left and margin-right.
        > Negative Margin: A margin with a negative value indicates the elements overlap with each other.

    Define Margin
    To define any margin on any HTML element you can use the CSS margin property. 
    This property is a shorthand property of the 'margin-top', 'margin-right', 'margin-bottom', and 'margin-left' properties. 
    A single value will generate a margin all around the element.

        Syntax
            margin: "value";
    
    CSS Individual Margin Properties:
    margin-top: This property is used to set the top margin of any element.
    margin-right: This property is used to set the right margin of any element.
    margin-bottom: This property is used to set the bottom margin of any element.
    margin-left: This property is used to set the left margin of any element.

        Syntax
            margin-top: "value";
            margin-right: "value";
            margin-bottom: "value";
            margin-left: "value";

    CSS Margin Shorthand Property
        There are four ways to provide value to the CSS margin property all of them are mentioned and described below with the complete example code.

        Single Value: Here you can provide a single value to the margin property that same value will be applicable on four sides of the the element.

        Two Values: For two values, the first value(10px) represents the top and bottom margin while the second value(20px) represents the left and right margin.
         For example − margin: 10px 20px;
       
        Three Values: For three values, the first value(10px) represents the top margin, the second value(15px) represents the left and right margin,
         and the third value(20px) represents the bottom margin. For example − margin: 10px 15px 20px;
        
        Four Values: For four values, the first value(5px) represents the top margin, the second value(10px) represents the right margin,
        the third value(15px) represents the bottom margin, and the fourth value(20px) represents the left margin. For example − margin: 5px 10px 15px 20px;
       
            Syntax
                The syntax for the margin with single, double, triple, and four values is as follows:
                margin: "value" // Single Value
                margin: "value value" // Two Values
                margin: "value value value" // Three Values
                margin: "value value value value" // Four Values

6.  PADDING OF BOXES/BLOCKS IN CSS
    CSS padding is used to create extra space between the border of the element and its contents.

    Define Padding
    To define any padding on any HTML element, you can use the CSS padding property. This property is shorthand property of 'padding-top', 'padding-right', 'padding-bottom', and 'padding-left' properties. A single value will generate padding all around the element.

    Syntax
    padding: "value";

    CSS Individual Padding Properties:
    padding-top: This property is used to set the top padding of any element.
    padding-right: This property is used to set the right padding of any element.
    padding-bottom: This property is used to set the bottom padding of any element.
    padding-left: This property is used to set the left padding of any element.

    CSS Padding Shorthand Property
    There are four ways to provide value to the CSS padding property all of them are mentioned and described below with the complete example code.

    Single Values: Here you can provide a single value to the padding property that same value will be applicable on four sides of the the element.
    
    Two Values: For two values, the first value(10px) represents the top and bottom padding while the second value(20px) represents the left and right padding. 
    For example - padding: 10px 20px;
    
    Three Values: For three values, the first value(10px) represents the top padding, the second value(15px) represents the left and right padding, 
    and the third value(20px) represents the bottom padding. For example - padding: 10px 15px 20px;
    
    Four Values: For four values, the first value(5px) represents the top padding, the second value(10px) represents the right padding, 
    the third value(15px) represents the bottom padding, and the fourth value(20px) represents the left padding. For example - padding: 5px 10px 15px 20px;
    
    Syntax
    The syntax for the padding with single, double, triple, and four values is as follows:
    padding: "value" // Single Value
    padding: "value value" // Two Values
    padding: "value value value" // Three Values
    padding: "value value value value" // Four Values


7. BACKGROUND PROPERTIES OF BOXES/BLOCKS IN CSS
    CSS backgrounds define the background colors and images of HTML elements. They allow you to use different colors, gradients, or images behind the content. 

    CSS Background Shorthand Property
    The background shorthand property allows you to specify all background properties in a single declaration.

    The correct order of properties when using the shorthand background property is as follows:

    background-color
    background-image
    background-position
    background-size (must be used with /)
    background-repeat
    background-origin
    background-attachment
    background-clip

    Note: If background-size is to be added, it must be included immediately after the background-position, separated with '/'. For example: "left/50%".

    Useful Background properties:

    background-color: "value";

    background-image: url("url of image");

    background-repeat: no-repeat;
    background-repeat: repeat-x;
    background-repeat: repeat-y;
    background-repeat: round; - round off image ratio to fit the image in the box
    background-repeat: space; - put the extra space between the images (repeating or more than one images)

    background-position: "left offset value"  "right offset value";
    background-position: center;
    background-position: top;
    background-position: right;
    background-position: bottom;
    background-position: bottom right;

    background-size: "width value" "height value";
    background-size: contain; - adjust image width to box width
    background-size: cover; - smaller side of the image can be used to adjust (Larger side will be trimmed)

    background-attachment: scroll; - moves with box
    background-attachment: fixed; - does not move with box, fixed on screen but can only be visible inside the box